.TH XD 1 "April 2024" "XD Version 1.0" "General Commands Manual"

.SH NAME
xd \- Display a hexdump table of files

.SH SYNOPSIS
xd [\fI-D\fR|\fI-O\fR][\fI-L text\fR][\fI-K text\fR][\fI-R when\fR][\fI-b|-o\fR][\fI-d\fR][\fI-c cols\fR][\fI-g size\fR][\fI-p\fR][\fI-t type\fR][\fIu\fR] [\fIfile...\fR]
.br
xd \fI-i\fR [\fI-c cols\fR][\fI-n name\fR][\fI-u\fR] [\fIfile...\fR]
.br
xd \fI-?\fR

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B xd
Displays a hexdump table of the specified file(s) or standard input. The default columns size of the table is 16. The default bytes group size is 2.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-?
Displays the program usage informations instead of executing the program itself.
.TP
.B \-D
Disables the file offsets column at the generated hexdump table.
.TP
.B \-O
Enables the file offsets column at the generated hexdump table (default).
.TP
.B \-L text
Displays the specified text as the separator of the file hexdump to the file contents ASCII representation.
.TP
.B \-K text
Displays the specified text as the separator of the file offsets to the file hexdump.
.TP
.B \-R when
Specifies when to colorize output. The when option argument can be (non case-sensitive): auto, always or never. If when is "auto" it shall display colors only if the output is a tty and enviroment $NO_COLOR is not set, if when is "always" it shall always colorize output, and if when is "never" it shall never colorize output.
.TP
.B \-b
Perform a binary dump instead of hexdump (changes the default columns size to six and the default bytes group size to one).
.TP
.B \-c cols
Specifies a number of columns to be used instead of the default one. If zero, shall use only one big line.
.TP
.B \-d
Displays the file offsets in decimal instead of hexadecimal.
.TP
.B \-g size
Specifies a group size to be used instead of the default one. If zero, grouping shall be disabled.
.TP
.B \-i
Outputs C headers (changes the default columns size to twelve and ignores group size).
.TP
.B \-n name
Specify a variable name to be used with \fI-i\fR option. 
.TP
.B \-o
Use octal count.
.TP
.B \-p
Displays in plain dump format (change the default columns to thirty, changes the default group size to zero, disables file offsets, disables the colorizing and disables the exibition of the file contents ASCII representation).
.TP
.B \-t type 
Dumps in the specified base. Type may be: h or x (hexadecimal), o (octal), d (decimal) and b (binary).
.TP
.B \-u
Use upper case hexadecimal letters.

.SH STANDARD INPUT
Shall be used when no operands are provided or when the operand '-' is found.
.SH STANDARD OUTPUT
Shall be used to output the table when \fI-o\fR is not specified.
.SH STANDARD ERROR
Shall be used to display error informations only.

.SH RETURN VALUES:
0: No error has ocurred. 
.br 
>1: A error has ocurred. 

.SH EXAMPLES:
The utility base usage is pretty simple, let's see (supossing that \fIxd.1\fR is this file):
.br 
$ dd if=xd.1 bs=32 count=2 2> /dev/null | xd
.br
0000000000: 2e54 4820 5844 2031 2022 4170 7269 6c20  .TH XD 1 "April 
.br
0000000010: 3230 3234 2220 2258 4420 5665 7273 696f  2024" "XD Versio
.br
0000000020: 6e20 312e 3022 2022 4765 6e65 7261 6c20  n 1.0" "General 
.br
0000000030: 436f 6d6d 616e 6473 204d 616e 7561 6c22  Commands Manual"
.br
For a more simple output, you may want the general default behavior, but not to display the file ASCII representation, for that you may use:
.br
$ dd if=xd.1 bs=32 count=1 2> /dev/null | xd -pO -K': ' -c 16 -g 2
.br
0000000000:  2e54 4820 5844 2031 2022 4170 7269 6c20
.br
0000000010:  3230 3234 2220 2258 4420 5665 7273 696f
.br 
To discover the ASCII code of the character 'A', you could use:
.br 
$ echo 'A\c' | xd -p 
.br
41
.br
(only on POSIX® implementations of echo utility, on others, you may need to use \fI-e\fR to interpret the escape codes)
.br
To generate a embedded binary content on C, you could use: 
.br
$ xd -o xd_man.h -i -nxd_manual_page xd.1
.br 

.SH FUTURE DIRECTION
The utility doesn't supports EBCDIC to ASCII conversions, this may change someday.
.br 
A utility \fBunxd\fR(1) is in production, it shall do the reverse operation to \fBxd\fR(1).
.br 
The behavior previously described in KNOWN BUGS is no more present.

.SH AUTHOR
(©) 2024 by Arthur de Souza Manske 
.br 
<usr.asm@pm.me>

.SH LICENSE
1. You are able to distribute this program freely, provided you credit the author and distribute it within the source code.
.br
2. Usage terms: No warranty; No involvement in illegal activities or pornographic content.
.br
3. Contribution terms: Contributions must be made in good faith.
.br
4. Reverse engineering is permitted under the same terms as the source code usage.
.br
5. Derived source code must include these restrictions and may include additional ones.
.br
6. Don't use the authors name without his previous written permission.
.br
If you disagree, refrain from using this software. By using it, you assume all associated risks, as the software comes with no warranty.


.SH SEE ALSO
\fBdd\fR(1), \fBecho\fR(1), \fBhexdump\fR(1), \fBuuencode\fR(1), \fBuudecode\fR(1)
